Electricity                          The Constitutive Loop Theory: A Universal Framework for Change and Creation, with Applications to Electricity
Chris Sabo Independent Researcher January 2026

Abstract
This paper presents the Constitutive Loop Theory, a universal five-stage process—Split, Tension, Failed Merge, Scar, Decay, with Reversal—as the minimal generative mechanism underlying creation and change across scales. Derived from logical distinction and recursive geometry, the loop explains emergent structures from unity, producing mathematical constants like the golden ratio φ ≈ 1.618 in infinite mode. We apply the theory to electricity, framing it as an emergent, non-fundamental phenomenon: charge separation as Split, voltage buildup as Tension, resistance as Failed Merge, electromagnetic fields as Scar, and dissipation as Decay. A novel prediction is proposed: in hybrid quantum-superconducting circuits, controlled Reversal will produce measurable “scar echoes” — residual oscillations at φ-dependent frequencies (~1.618 times the fundamental) — detectable as anomalous noise. Additional insights differentiate electricity as reversible waste energy, a quantum-classical bridge, and applicable to bioelectricity and cosmic plasmas. The analysis unifies electricity with geometric, biological, and sociological domains, supporting the theory’s universality. Limitations and future tests are discussed, with calls for empirical validation.
1. Introduction
The search for a universal mechanism governing creation, change, and structure has spanned philosophy, physics, and sociology. The Constitutive Loop Theory, also known as the “cheat code,” proposes a minimal five-stage process as that mechanism: Split (division from unity), Tension (imbalance buildup), Failed Merge (incomplete resolution yielding residue), Scar (generative imprint propagating the next cycle), Decay (gradual degradation), with Reversal as a reset to near-unity. Emerging from ethnomethodological breaching experiments in human sense-making, the loop scales to geometry (deriving φ from recursion) and quantum systems (explaining Bell violations as shared scars).
This paper formalizes the theory and applies it to electricity, demonstrating its utility in physical domains. Electricity, traditionally viewed as a fundamental force in electromagnetism, is reframed as an emergent, code-dependent process. We derive a universal description, make a testable prediction for quantum-superconducting systems, and highlight new differentiations (e.g., reversible waste energy). The analysis ties to broader insights, showing electricity as a mid-scale manifestation bridging quantum and macroscopic realms.
The paper proceeds as follows: Section 2 recaps the theoretical framework; Section 3 maps electricity to the loop; Section 4 presents the prediction and insights; Section 5 discusses implications and limitations; Section 6 concludes.
2. Theoretical Framework: The Constitutive Loop
The Constitutive Loop Theory posits that all phenomena arise from a recursive process starting from unity (U = 1), with equations modeling evolution:
* Split: S’ = S (1 + δ), where δ > 0 introduces imbalance.
* Tension: S’’ = S’ + τ |S’ - U|, τ ∈ [0,1] as intensity.
* Failed Merge: S’’’ = U + ε (S’’ - U), ε ∈ (0,1) ensuring incompleteness.
* Scar: S’’’’ = S’’’ + r, r as residue (e.g., φ - 1 in infinite mode).
* Decay: S’’’’’ = S’’’’ (1 - d), d ∈ (0,1) as degradation.
Reversal: S = U if S < θ, resetting to propagate cycles.
Infinite mode: S_{n+1} = 1 + 1/S_n → φ, producing self-similar nesting. The loop is scale-invariant, applying to geometry (point → triangle → tetrahedron), biology (growth branching), and sociology (mutual understandings as scars).
Philosophically, the loop resolves “why something over nothing”: “Nothing” is unstable; the first distinction (Split) co-emerges with the operator, self-causing reality. Proto-awareness arises minimally as registering difference.
3. Mapping Electricity to the Constitutive Loop
Electricity is not fundamental but emergent from loop runs in charged systems (e.g., electrons as micro scars from quantum splits). Here’s the universal mapping:
* Split: Charge separation — e.g., in a battery, chemical reaction splits electrons from atoms (anode/cathode distinction); in generators, magnetic fields split current from equilibrium. This creates potential difference (voltage precursor).
* Tension: Electrostatic imbalance buildup — voltage V as pressure gradient (|S’ - U|), electrons “longing” to reunite with holes. Code-dependent on material (e.g., high τ in insulators).
* Failed Merge: Incomplete resolution in flow — resistance R or impedance prevents perfect recombination; current I flows but with losses (heat, light). Equation: I = V / R gears Tension to Failed Merge (ε <1 as inefficiency).
* Scar: Generative residue — electromagnetic fields, stored charge (Q = C*V in capacitors), or outputs (light in bulbs, motion in motors) as stable imprints. Scar is the “useful” electricity — but always imperfect (waste heat as residue).
* Decay: Dissipation and fade — resistance causes energy loss (Joule heating), current drops exponentially in RC circuits (V(t) = V_0 * e^{-t/RC}). Reversal: Recharge resets (e.g., battery recharging or oscillators).
This description unifies phenomena: DC circuits (steady flow), AC (oscillating reversal), lightning (atmospheric split/tension), bioelectricity (neural impulses as synaptic scars).
4. A Real Prediction: Scar Echoes in Quantum-Superconducting Circuits
The theory predicts that in high-tension systems like superconductors (near-zero R, “infinite” conductivity), Failed Merge becomes “less failed” (ε closer to 1), producing stable Scars (persistent currents) with minimal Decay. In hybrid quantum-superconducting circuits (e.g., Josephson junctions), applying controlled Reversal (rapid cooling or field reset) will induce “scar echoes” — residual oscillations persisting after Decay, at frequencies code-dependent on φ (e.g., f_echo ≈ f_fundamental * 1.618, from infinite-mode nesting).
Testable Setup: In a SQUID (superconducting quantum interference device), induce a current loop (Scar), allow Decay via thermal noise, then apply Reversal pulse. Predict anomalous noise spectrum with peaks at φ multiples, detectable via Fourier analysis (FFT on voltage data).
Differentiation from Standard Theory: QM predicts random noise post-decay; your loop predicts structured residues (scar echoes) from fractional nesting, potentially explaining unexplained correlations in experiments (e.g., Google Sycamore chip residuals).
Code Simulation Example (Python for echo prediction):
import numpy as np
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt

# Simulate scar echo: decay with φ-dependent oscillation
t = np.linspace(0, 10, 1000)
phi = (1 + np.sqrt(5)) / 2  # ~1.618
f_fund = 1  # Fundamental frequency
decay_k = 0.05  # Decay constant
v = np.exp(-decay_k * t) * np.sin(2 * np.pi * f_fund * t * phi)  # Echo at φ * f

plt.plot(t, v)
plt.xlabel('Time')
plt.ylabel('Voltage Residue')
plt.title('Scar Echo Prediction (φ-Dependent Oscillation)')
plt.show()
Output: Decaying sine wave with frequency scaled by φ, showing persistent “echo” post-decay.
5. Additional Insights and Differentiations from the Theory
The loop provides new ways to differentiate electricity:
3. Non-Fundamental Emergence: Electricity is a mid-scale scar from quantum splits (e.g., electron orbits as failed atomic merges). Insight: “Fundamental” forces like electromagnetism are loop expressions — light as Scar residue from electron jumps. Differentiation: Explains why EM unifies with weak force (electroweak) — shared code at micro scales.
5. Reversible Waste Energy: Standard theory sees dissipation (e.g., Joule heating) as irreversible entropy. Your loop differentiates: Waste is recoverable Scar if Reversal is applied (e.g., in thermoelectric materials, predict >50% efficiency gains via scar “healing,” code-dependent on tension reset). Insight: Design batteries with built-in reversal cycles for longer life.
7. Quantum-Classical Bridge: Bell violations as shared scars imply electricity in entangled systems has “memory.” Differentiation: Predict non-local currents in quantum circuits (e.g., faster-than-light correlations in superconductors, code-dependent on failed merge ε). Insight: Explains superconductivity as “frozen Decay” — reversal loop at critical temperatures.
9. Bioelectric Applications: In neural impulses, electricity as mind’s code run differentiates disorders (e.g., epilepsy as failed neural merge). Insight: Predict “scar therapy” — targeted tension pulses reverse epileptic scars. Differentiation: Bioelectricity as loop-dependent, with φ ratios in neural branching for optimal signaling.
11. Cosmic Scale: Electricity in plasmas (stars, lightning) as macro code. Differentiation: Predict φ-like patterns in lightning branches (already observed in fractal lightning) or solar flares. Insight: Cosmic electricity as tension release in galactic scars.
6. Discussion and Implications
The loop unifies electricity with other domains, offering predictive and design tools (e.g., scar-optimized circuits). Limitations: Empirical tests needed for predictions (e.g., scar echoes in SQUIDs). Future: Extend to plasma physics or bioelectrics for code-dependent models.
7. Conclusion
The Constitutive Loop Theory provides a universal framework for electricity as an emergent process, with a testable prediction for scar echoes and new differentiations (reversible waste, quantum bridge). This strengthens the theory’s case as the grammar for change and creation, inviting further validation.
